added blog for week 9-10 (#185)
aiidateam/aiida-website: src/blog/gsoc-2026-aiida-natural-language.md

The work is visible in two pull requests under review: [the core execution framework](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/29) and [the plugin discovery system](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/31).
The architectural foundation is now solid enough for the next phase, once these PRs are merged.

---

## Weeks 9 & 10: Making the agent prove what it says

### The agent made up a number

I asked it what k-point spacing to use for a silicon relaxation, and it told me.
The number looked completely reasonable.

> It had come from nowhere: no tool had returned it, and the documentation search had not been called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it had come from nowhere: no tool had returned it, and the documentation search had not been called.
```

> A wrong number here is not a wrong sentence.

Reviewer: "Is not X, but is Y" is very AI typical. I'd just state what the wrong number causes normally, without the negation.

I tested it five times and it ignored the instruction five times.

So the check moved out of the prompt and into code that runs after the answer is written ([#48](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/48)).
Every reply is now scanned for numbers carrying a unit, written as a percentage, or sitting in a sentence that names a simulation parameter.
Anything that appears in no tool output gets flagged in the terminal before the user reads the answer.
The detector is deliberately narrow, because a warning that fires on correct answers is one people learn to scroll past.

### One question, several specialists

Until this point you had to tell the tool which agent you wanted with `-a analysis` or `-a execution`.
That is a reasonable thing to ask of me and an unreasonable thing to ask of a researcher who has not read the architecture.

I added a router that picks the specialist per request ([#45](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/45)), then replaced it with a planner ([#50](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/50)) once it became clear that some questions need both.

> "Why did this fail, and can you resubmit it with a longer wallclock" is two steps with a handoff in the middle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Why did this fail, and can you resubmit it with a longer wallclock limit" is two steps with a handoff in the middle.
```

The planner has no tools of its own, so the step that decides what to do cannot touch the database.

Passing a step's findings to the next one as prose lost the part that mattered.

> A diagnosis says the failure is in `PwCalculation` 334407, and the next step needs that number, not a sentence containing it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A diagnosis says the failure is in a `PwCalculation` with a PK of 334407, and the next step needs that number, not a sentence containing it.
```
I'd imagine it would also work with the sentence, but, indeed, having the PK explicitly is of course better.

The handoff is now a typed message carrying the node references the first step's tools returned ([#58](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/58)), so a second model never has to read a pk back out of prose.

### Diagnosing a real failure

The data archive gave me failed Quantum ESPRESSO runs to work with, which is different from a test fixture in a way I had underestimated.

> A `PwBaseWorkChain` that exits 501 has not really told you anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `PwBaseWorkChain` that exits with 501 has not really told you anything.
```
There should be more information in the log messages of the failed process, but I imagine you are talking about what the agent tells the user / the information it was fetching.

The work chain is reporting that something below it failed, and the calculation that actually broke is somewhere further down.
The tool I built walks that chain and reads the exit code's meaning from the process class itself ([#53](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/53)).

The part I did not anticipate was the restart handlers.

> AiiDA work chains record which recovery strategies they already attempted, and without reading that record an agent will happily recommend a fix the work chain tried twice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AiiDA WorkChains record which recovery strategies they already attempted, and without reading that record an agent will happily recommend a fix the WorkChain already tried twice.
```

> On pk 334599 it now reports that `handle_vcrelax_converged_except_final_scf` fired on iteration 1 and the run still failed, which is the sentence that tells you restarting is not the answer.

Reviewer: `pk 334599` is meaningless in that context, no reader of the blog post has the archive; we are just using it for development. I'd make the sentence here more general.

Reading the calculation's own SCF trace came out of the same work ([#55](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/55)).
A cycle that ran out of iterations and one that never settled look identical from the exit code and call for different responses.
My first version of the parser reported oscillation on a relaxation that was converging fine, because I had treated the restart between ionic steps as part of one electronic cycle.

### Writing and running code

Some questions do not fit any fixed tool.
Finding every structure in a group that contains a particular element and reporting its final energy is several filters and a projection, and the `QueryBuilder` expresses it in six lines.
Adding a tool for each combination does not converge.

So the agent now writes the Python ([#63](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/63)) and runs it before showing it to anyone ([#65](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/65)).
Code that raises comes back to the model as a traceback, and it fixes its own snippet rather than handing you one that does not work.

> Executing model-written Python against a research database needed more thought than the rest of the fortnight combined.

Reviewer: I'd drop "fortnight" here (and below, where it's used again). I don't understand what this word is supposed to mean in that context?

> The answer is that it runs against a second AiiDA profile pointing at the same database through a PostgreSQL role holding no write privilege ([#64](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/64)).

Reviewer: Hm, good to keep for now, but I'd put some more thought into it. There might be cases where a fully fresh empty DB can also be useful, e.g., if the tool is iterating on some workflow execution, and we don't want the main DB be cluttered with unsuccesful runs.

> A write is refused by PostgreSQL rather than caught by a check I wrote.

Reviewer: This is probably better than the previous constraint, yes!

> A scratch database would have been safer and useless, since an empty one cannot answer any question worth asking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While a scratch database would have been safer, it would have been useless, though, since it cannot answer any question worth asking.
```

> There is a static guard on top of that, and I have been careful in the code and the decision record not to call it a sandbox.

Reviewer: We now have some `sandbox` CLI entry point and the word appears in the code, though, no?

Python cannot be contained in-process, and a guard that claimed otherwise would be believed.

### Where things stand

The two agents became three, joined by a planner that decides which of them a request needs.

> Everything that writes to the database still stops and asks first, and that guarantee lives on the tool rather than in any prompt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Everything that writes to the database still stops and asks first, and that guarantee lives on the tool rather than in the prompt.
```

> Twelve pull requests merged over the fortnight, and the architecture is written down in an overview, an extension guide and eleven decision records ([#51](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/51)).

Reviewer: ~fortnight~

> Twelve pull requests merged over the fortnight, and the architecture is written down in an overview, an extension guide and eleven decision records ([#51](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/51)).

Reviewer: The 11 ADRs did not just appear throughout the last two weeks, though. So I'd clarify this here, _or_ just reference the new ones you added.

What I have not done is run the whole thing against a real calculation from end to end.
The unit suite covers the plumbing thoroughly and cannot tell me whether the planner routes a real question sensibly or whether a generated query returns what a researcher expected.

> That is what the next two weeks are for.

Reviewer: I think this ordering is more logical (and some text edits):
```suggestion
While the unit suite covers the plumbing thoroughly, it cannot tell me whether the planner routes a real question sensibly or whether a generated query returns what a researcher expected.
In addition, tests that run the whole architecture for a real calculation from end to end are still missing.
That is what the next two weeks are for.
```
